Bhairavanath temple is one of the temples that lies at the central of Bhaktapur, Taumadhi  Square and Bhairavanath Temple is built in the pagoda style and It is three-storey. It is one of the temple devoted to Lord Bhairava is one of the rectangular based temples of Bhaktapur. Curiously, there is no entrance on the temple's lengthy west facade that faces the square. Instead, priests access the interior from the south. The west facade is largely symmetrical and features a ground-level shrine with Bhairav depicted in miniature on a small metal throne. Michael Hutt notes that this small statue is frequently stolen and replaced. To either side of the deity are hammered copper plates depicting Bhairav's eyes, two pairs of hands, and two dogs and his faithful companions. At present, perhaps to discourage theft, the ground-level shrine is blocked from casual access by a makeshift wooden barricade. The temple is dedicated to lord Bhairav, which is supposed to be the most ferocious form of Lord Shiva. The Bhairavanath established in this temple is a formidable incarnation of lord shiva, who also prefers to name Kasi Vishwanath and Aakash bhairava. He is somehow famous for his obstreperous and stubborn character. Bhairav has a particular fascination with machines and is often thought to inhabit wheels, with different versions of the god inhabiting different wheels on the same chariot. At the Bhairavanath temple, a chariot used in the annual Bisket-Jatra festival is stored, dismantled, against the temple's north wall. Bhairavanath's association with the chariot used in the festival highlights his connection to the annual Bisket-Jatra festival. The statue of Lord Bhairav is about 12 feet long and is one of the largest statues in Kathmandu Valley. Thousands of people visit Bhairavanath temple during Bhairav Ashtami or Bhairav Jayanthi as it is celebrated religiously.  Even though the temple was slightly damaged during the earthquake in November 2015, it still has retrained most of structure. The Renovative history of Bhairavanath Temple says that The temple was first inaugurated by King Ananda Deva in the 13th century. However, that area, before the establishment of the temple was already popular for the Shaivism pilgrims. It was well known as Lalitmaheshwor. Regarding which there are inscriptions found in the temple. But, it was definitely not triple-roofed, then. During the reign of King Vishwa Malla, the temple was gracefully restored in a one-storeyed temple.After, King Jagatjyoti Malla decorated it with golden roofs. Likewise, in N.S. 788, King Jagat Prakash Malla established his own image along with his minister Chandrashekhar in the temple while having a grand worshipping. Later on, King Bhupatindra Malla modified it into a triple roofed temple at around N.S. 837-38 (1718 AD) and added the seven golden pinnacles in it. The reconstruction took time after the engineering of the Nyatapola temple. By worse luck, the devasting earthquake of 1934AD collapsed it.  And optimistically reassembled in the same structure. The ruinous earthquake of April 2015 again, made this temple renovated. It also destroyed the tiny way, passing through the betal temple. That ultimately leads toward the interior part of the Bhairavanath temple. There are legends about the temple. The inner part of the temple consists of the head of Lord Bhairav. There are many stories as to why and how Lord Bhairav’s head was cut off and worshipped here. According to legend, long ago, Kasi Bhairabnath  traveled to Nepal to view either the Bisket Jatra  or the Bal Kaumari Jatra. A tantric priestess in the crowd recognized him for what he was and attempted to immobilize him, but Vishvanath sought to escape by sinking into the ground. As his body descended into the earth, the priestess realized the god was her own husband. To prevent his escape, she ordered his head cut off where it protruded from the ground. Being a god, this was far from a fatal wound, and the priestess enshrined the head in the temple that now stands here. The body, meanwhile, returned to Benares whence it came. Dowman notes that a headless image of Bhairav is still worshipped there even today. Another story about this temple is also interesting, passed orally by our ancestors. According to this, the lord bhairava of Varanasi once visited Bhaktapur to see Bisket jatra. Bisket jatra is one of the biggest jatras of the newar people. During the festival, the lord Bhairava somehow was recognized by a priest and he just cast a decoy spell on him.  As a quick reaction, he started to sink into the terra firma to go back to Varanasi. But the priest didnot let him go. As if, he grabs the head of Bhairava in his hand and decollates him with his sword. That is why people say that the head doesnot match the body of Kasi Vishwanath. It is also believed that the head is still treasured in a box of this temple.
